gh-134160: Start "Extending and embedding" with a Diataxis-style tutorial (#142314)
python/cpython: Doc/extending/first-extension-module.rst

Your first C API extension module
*********************************

This tutorial will take you through creating a simple
Python extension module written in C or C++.

It assumes basic knowledge about Python: you should be able to
define functions in Python code before starting to write them in C.
See :ref:`tutorial-index` for an introduction to Python itself.

The tutorial should be useful for anyone who can write a basic C library.
While we will mention several concepts that a C beginner would not be expected
to know, like ``static`` functions or linkage declarations, understanding these
is not necessary for success.

We will focus on giving you a "feel" of what Python's C API is like.
It will not teach you important concepts, like error handling
and reference counting, which are covered in later chapters.

As you write the code, you will need to compile it.
Prepare to spend some time choosing, installing and configuring a build tool,
since CPython itself does not include one.

We will assume that you use a Unix-like system (including macOS and
Linux), or Windows.
On other systems, you might need to adjust some details -- for example,
a system command name.

.. note::

>    This tutorial uses API that was added in CPython 3.15.

Reviewer: an API, or APIs

==========================

Begin by creating a file named :file:`spammodule.c`. [#why-spammodule]_

Now, while the file is empty, we'll compile it.

Choose a build tool such as Setuptools or Meson, and follow its instructions
to compile and install the empty :file:`spammodule.c` as a C extension module.

This will ensure that your build tool works, so that you can make
and test incremental changes as you follow the rest of the text.

.. note:: Workaround for missing ``PyInit``

   If your build tool output complains about missing ``PyInit_spam``,
   add the following function to your module for now:

   .. code-block:: c

      // A workaround
      void *PyInit_spam(void) { return NULL; }

   This is a shim for an old-style :ref:`initialization function <extension-export-hook>`,
   which was required in extension modules for CPython 3.14 and below.
   Current CPython will not call it, but some build tools may still assume that
   all extension modules need to define it.

   If you use this workaround, you will get the exception
   ``SystemError: initialization of spam failed without raising an exception``
   instead of an :py:exc:`ImportError` in the next step.

.. note::

>    Using a third-party build tool is heavily recommended, as in will take

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Using a third-party build tool is heavily recommended, as it will take
```

   care of various details of your platform and Python installation,
   of naming the resulting extension, and, later, of distributing your work.

   If you don't want to use a tool, you can try to run your compiler directly.
   The following command should work for many flavors of Linux, and generate
   a ``spam.so`` file that you need to put in a directory

>    in :py:attr:`sys.path`:

Reviewer: in → on ?

   .. code-block:: sh

      gcc --shared spammodule.c -o spam.so

When your extension is compiled and installed, start Python and try to import
your extension.
This should fail with the following exception:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   Traceback (most recent call last):
      ...
   ImportError: dynamic module does not define module export function (PyModExport_spam or PyInit_spam)

Including the Header
====================

Now, add the first line to your file: include :file:`Python.h` to pull in
all declarations of the Python C API:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-at: <Python.h>
   :end-at: <Python.h>

Next, include the header for the :c:func:`system` function:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-at: <stdlib.h>
   :end-at: <stdlib.h>

Be sure to put this, and any other standard library includes, *after*
:file:`Python.h`.
On some systems, Python may define some pre-processor definitions

> that affect the standard headers.

Reviewer: This is a useful note, but not sure about the tip just below.
It’s giving details that are not needed for this tuto, about something that people shouldn’t do, and already documented in c-api/intro

Author: Thanks. I think it's good to answer "why does my code work without this" questions. And an important thing in the answer is the *link* to `c-api/intro`.

I've moved this to a footnote, does that work better?

Reviewer: Yes 👍🏽

   command, you can run something like:

   .. code-block:: shell

      gcc --shared $(python-config --cflags --ldflags) spammodule.c -o spam.so

Module export hook
==================

The exception you got when you tried to import the module told you that Python
is looking for a "module export function", also known as a
:ref:`module export hook <extension-export-hook>`.
Let's define one.

First, add a prototype below the ``#include`` lines:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-after: /// Export hook prototype
   :end-before: ///

.. tip::
   The prototype is not strictly necessary, but some modern compilers emit
   warnings without it.
   It's generally better to add the prototype than to disable the warning.

The :c:macro:`PyMODEXPORT_FUNC` macro declares the function's
return type, and adds any special linkage declarations needed
to make the function visible and usable when CPython loads it.

After the prototype, add the function itself.
For now, make it return ``NULL``:

.. code-block:: c

   PyMODEXPORT_FUNC
   PyModExport_spam(void)
   {
      return NULL;
   }

Compile and load the module again.

> You should get a different error this time.

Reviewer: Should this say to restart the Python interpreter?
(I don’t know if the previous non-loading module will be cached in sys.modules)

Author: A non-loading one won't be cached, but I added a note to the later sections where the module loads.
Thanks!

* ``ml_doc``: a docstring;
* ``ml_meth``: the C function to be called; and
* ``ml_flags``: a set of flags describing details like how Python arguments are
  passed to the C function.
  We'll use :c:data:`METH_O` here -- the flag that matches our
  ``spam_system`` function's signature.

Because modules typically create several functions, these definitions
need to be collected in an array, with a zero-filled sentinel at the end.
Add this array just below the ``spam_system`` function:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-after: /// Module method table
   :end-before: ///

As with module slots, a zero-filled sentinel marks the end of the array.

Next, we'll add the method to the module.
Add a :c:data:`Py_mod_methods` slot to your a :c:type:`PyMethodDef` array:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-after: /// Module slot table
   :end-before: ///
   :emphasize-lines: 6

Recompile your extension again, and test it.
You should now be able to call the function, and get ``None`` back:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   >>> print(spam.system)
   <built-in function system>

>    >>> print(spam.system('whoami'))

Reviewer: Doesn’t this still print the output of whoami, then the return value?
(confusing IMHO – but the example should match what people will see)

Author: We're at a point where ``spam.system`` doesn't run the system command yet.
I agree it's confusing; I added a note.

   None

Returning an integer
====================

Now, let's take a look at the return value.
Instead of ``None``, we'll want ``spam.system`` to return a number -- that is,
a Python :py:type:`int` object.
Eventually this will be the exit code of a system command,
but let's start with a fixed value, say, ``3``.

The Python C API provides a function to create a Python :py:type:`int` object
from a C ``int`` values: :c:func:`PyLong_FromLong`. [#why-pylongfromlong]_

To call it, replace the ``Py_RETURN_NONE`` with the following 3 lines:

> .. this could be a one-liner, but we want to how the data types here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. this could be a one-liner, but we want to show the data types here
```

.. code-block:: c
   :emphasize-lines: 4-6

   static PyObject *
   spam_system(PyObject *self, PyObject *arg)
   {
      int status = 3;
      PyObject *result = PyLong_FromLong(status);
      return result;
   }

Recompile and run again, and check that the function now returns 3:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   >>> spam.system('whoami')
   3

Accepting a string
==================

Finally, let's handle the function argument.

Our C function, :c:func:`!spam_system`, takes two arguments.
The first one, ``PyObject *self``, will be set to the ``spam`` module
object.
This isn't useful in our case, so we'll ignore it.

The other one, ``PyObject *arg``, will be set to the object that the user
called the Python with.
We expect that it should be a Python string.
In order to use the information in it, we will need
to convert it to a C value --- in this case, a C string (``const char *``).

> There's a slight type mismatch here: Python's :c:type:`str` objects store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a slight type mismatch here: Python's :type:`str` objects store
```

Reviewer 2: Will that work? It should be ```:class:`str` ```, no?

```suggestion
There's a slight type mismatch here: Python's :class:`str` objects store
```

Reviewer: Probably! (I remembered the python domain defines class, func, meth, data so it makes sense type is not also there, as it was synonym with class before we got static typing)

.. highlight:: c

.. _extending-simpleexample:
.. _first-extension-module:

*********************************
Your first C API extension module
*********************************

This tutorial will take you through creating a simple
Python extension module written in C or C++.

We will use the low-level Python C API directly.
For easier ways to create extension modules, see
the :ref:`recommended third party tools <c-api-tools>`.

The tutorial assumes basic knowledge about Python: you should be able to
define functions in Python code before starting to write them in C.
See :ref:`tutorial-index` for an introduction to Python itself.

> The tutorial should be approachable for anyone who can write a basic C library.

Reviewer 3: Should this say "approachable to" instead of "approachable for"? I think the former is more common, but I don't know if the latter is incorrect.

Reviewer: What region are you from?
For me (learned british then north american english) _for_ sounds better and more usual.

Reviewer 3: I'm from the Northern US, so I'm familiar with silly American English. I'm fine with leaving this as-is if this is valid in other regions.

to know, like ``static`` functions or linkage declarations, understanding these
is not necessary for success.

We will focus on giving you a "feel" of what Python's C API is like.
It will not teach you important concepts, like error handling
and reference counting, which are covered in later chapters.

We will assume that you use a Unix-like system (including macOS and
Linux), or Windows.
On other systems, you might need to adjust some details -- for example,
a system command name.

You need to have suitable C compiler and Python development headers installed.
On Linux, headers are often in a package like ``python3-dev``
or ``python3-devel``.

.. note::

   This tutorial uses APIs that were added in CPython 3.15.
   To create an extension that's compatible with earlier versions of CPython,
   please follow an earlier version of this documentation.

   This tutorial uses some syntax added in C11 and C++20.
   If your extension needs to be compatible with earlier standards,
   please follow tutorials in documentation for Python 3.14 or below.

What we'll do
=============

Let's create an extension module called ``spam`` [#why-spam]_,
which will include a Python interface to the C

> standard library function :c:func:`system`.

Reviewer 3: This isn't defined in our docs so `:c:func:` won't work, but we can link to a manpage if you'd like.

Author: Like all standard C functions, it's in `nitpick_ignore` it `Doc/conf.py`.
It'll work fine -- it won't link (like if it was ``:c:func:`!system` ``), but maybe later we can add a better solution for *all* of these.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be good to at least be consistent; we flip between ``` ``system`` ``` and ``` :c:func:`system` ``` in this file.

This function is defined in ``stdlib.h``.
It takes a C string as argument, runs the argument as a system
command, and returns a result value as an integer.
A manual page for ``system`` might summarize it this way::

   #include <stdlib.h>
   int system(const char *command);

Note that like many functions in the C standard library,
this function is already exposed in Python.
In production, use :py:func:`os.system` or :py:func:`subprocess.run`
rather than the module you'll write here.

We want this function to be callable from Python as follows:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   >>> status = spam.system("whoami")
   User Name
   >>> status
   0

.. note::

   The system command ``whoami`` prints out your username.
   It's useful in tutorials like this one because it has the same name on
   both Unix and Windows.

Start with the headers
======================

Begin by creating a directory for this tutorial, and switching to it
on command line.
Then, create a file named :file:`spammodule.c` in your directory.
[#why-spammodule]_

In this file, we'll include two headers: :file:`Python.h` to pull in
all declarations of the Python C API, and :file:`stdlib.h` for the

> :c:func:`system` function. [#stdlib-h]_

Reviewer 3: Ditto -- we don't define this.

Add the following lines to :file:`spammodule.c`:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-at: <Python.h>
   :end-at: <stdlib.h>

Be sure to put :file:`stdlib.h`, and any other standard library includes,
*after* :file:`Python.h`.
On some systems, Python may define some pre-processor definitions
that affect the standard headers.

Running your build tool
=======================

With only the includes in place, your extension won't do anything.

> Still, it's a good time to try compiling and importing it.

Reviewer 3: It definitely won't import at this point, because there's no code or package yet. Let's not get the reader hung up on that:

```suggestion
Still, it's a good time to try compiling it.
```

Author: Does “compile it and try to import it” sound good?
I do want the reader to *try* :)

Reviewer 3: I'm fine with that as long as it's clear that importing will fail. I'm worried that someone will get stuck wondering why the import isn't working.

This will ensure that your build tool works, so that you can make
and test incremental changes as you follow the rest of the text.

CPython itself does not come with a tool to build extension modules;
it is recommended to use a third-party project for this.
In this tutorial, we'll use `meson-python`_.
(If you want to use another one, see :ref:`first-extension-other-tools`.)

.. at the time of writing, meson-python has the least overhead for a
   simple extension using PyModExport.
   Change this if another tool makes things easier.

``meson-python`` requires defining a "project" using two extra files.

First, add ``pyproject.toml`` with these contents:

.. code-block:: toml

   [build-system]
   build-backend = 'mesonpy'
   requires = ['meson-python']

   [project]
   # Placeholder project information
   # (change this before distributing the module)
   name = 'sampleproject'
   version = '0'

Then, create ``meson.build`` containing the following:

.. code-block:: meson

>    project('purelib-and-platlib', 'c')

Reviewer 4: Most likely you want to change the project name here.
```suggestion
   project('sampleproject', 'c')
```

The :c:macro:`PyMODEXPORT_FUNC` macro declares the function's
return type, and adds any special linkage declarations needed
to make the function visible and usable when CPython loads it.

After the prototype, add the function itself.
For now, make it return ``NULL``:

.. code-block:: c

   PyMODEXPORT_FUNC
   PyModExport_spam(void)
   {
      return NULL;
   }

Compile and load the module again.
You should get a different error this time.

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   Traceback (most recent call last):
      ...
   SystemError: module export hook for module 'spam' failed without setting an exception

Simply returning ``NULL`` is *not* correct behavior for an export hook,
and CPython complains about it.
That's good -- it means that CPython found the function!
Let's now make it do something useful.

The slot table
==============

Rather than ``NULL``, the export hook should return the information needed to
create a module.
Let's with the basics: the name and docstring.

The information should de defined in as ``static`` array of
:c:type:`PyModuleDef_Slot` entries, which are essentially key-value pairs.
Define this array just before your export hook:

> .. code-block:: c

Reviewer 3: Somewhere in here we should mention that the name is required while the docstring is optional.

Author: They're actually both optional.
But, while *reference* documentation needs to mention it, a tutorial doesn't. And I don't really want to encourage leaving docstrings out.

   static PyModuleDef_Slot spam_slots[] = {
      {Py_mod_name, "spam"},
      {Py_mod_doc, "A wonderful module with an example function"},
      {0, NULL}
   };

> For both name and docstring, the values are C strings -- that is,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For both the name and docstring, the values are C strings -- that is,
```

Reviewer: Or `*name* and *docstring*` if these refer to parameters / attributes.

Author: Even better: ``:c:data:`Py_mod_name` and :c:data:`Py_mod_doc` `` -- i.e. click to learn more :)

> NUL-terminated UTF-8 encoded byte arrays.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps it's worth mentioning that this is true for most (all?) "C strings" in the C API.

Reviewer: ? that’s what the second part of the sentence is saying.

Reviewer 3: I meant adding a sentence like "This is true for all strings in Python's C API" to imply that we're not affected by locale, but it was more of a thinking-out-loud suggestion. I'm fine with keeping it as-is.

Note the zero-filled sentinel entry at the end.
If you forget it, you'll trigger undefined behavior.

The array is defined as ``static`` -- not visible outside this ``.c`` file.
This will be a common theme.
CPython only needs to access the export hook; all global variables
and all other functions should generally be ``static``, so that they don't

> clash with other extensions.

Reviewer 3: Hm, what is this referring to? A global called `int foo` in extension A shouldn't clash with an `int foo` in extension B. (Or do they, and I just don't know what I'm talking about?)

Author: It's platform-specific.
Modern defaults tend to keep stuff in DLLs/so's private unless specifically marked for export, but AFAIK it's not universal (especially outside the major platforms and tool settings). It's best to stay explicit.

Return this array from your export hook instead of ``NULL``:

.. code-block:: c
   :emphasize-lines: 4

   PyMODEXPORT_FUNC
   PyModExport_spam(void)
   {
      return spam_slots;
   }

Now, recompile and try it out:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   >>> print(spam)
   <module 'spam' from '/home/encukou/dev/cpython/spam.so'>

You have a extension module!
Try ``help(spam)`` to see the docstring.

The next step will be adding a function.

.. _backtoexample:

Exposing a function
===================

To expose the ``system`` C function directly to Python,
we'll need to write a layer of glue code to convert arguments from Python
objects to C values, and the C return value back to Python.

> One of the simplest glue code is a ":c:data:`METH_O`" function,

Reviewer 3: "simplest glue code" reads weirdly:
```suggestion
One of the simplest ways to write glue code is a ":c:data:`METH_O`" function,
```

which takes two Python objects and returns one.

> All Pyton objects -- regardless of the Python type -- are represented in C

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All Python objects -- regardless of the Python type -- are represented in C
```

as pointers to the ``PyObject`` structure.

Add such a function above the slots array::

   static PyObject *
   spam_system(PyObject *self, PyObject *arg)
   {
      Py_RETURN_NONE;
   }

> For now, we'll ignor the arguments, and use the :c:macro:`Py_RETURN_NONE`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For now, we'll ignore the arguments, and use the :c:macro:`Py_RETURN_NONE`
```

> macro to properly ``return`` a Python :py:data:`None` object.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure "return" should be an inline code block. Was the intention to associate this with Python's `return` keyword? If so, let's link to it. Otherwise, let's just use "return" as a verb.

Author: It's meant to associate with the C ``return`` keyword.

It's a macro that affects control flow, which might be somewhat unusual if your background is writing clean C code :)

Reviewer 3: Hm, ok, I see how "return" as a verb might be misleading here. As an alternative, we could first introduce "`return Py_None`" and then add a sentence like "This case is so common that Python provides a macro for it: `Py_RETURN_NONE`". That way, the reader is already familiar with the context and will know that the macro affects control flow.

I might be overthinking this part. If you feel strongly that this is fine as-is, I can live with leaving it.

Author: But I don't want to encourage people to write ``return Py_None``. There should be refcount linters that bite you for doing that.

The macro expands to ``return Py_NewRef(Py_None)`` (with a CPython-specific optimization that does make it ``return Py_None`` in practice). But I don't want to introduce ``Py_NewRef`` at this point either.

So, I'm now at:
> For now, we'll ignore the arguments, and use the :c:macro:`Py_RETURN_NONE`
macro, which expands to a ``return`` statement that properly returns
a Python :py:data:`None` object.

information in a structure called
:c:type:`PyMethodDef` [#why-pymethoddef]_:

* ``ml_name``: the name of the Python function;
* ``ml_doc``: a docstring;
* ``ml_meth``: the C function to be called; and
* ``ml_flags``: a set of flags describing details like how Python arguments are
  passed to the C function.
  We'll use :c:data:`METH_O` here -- the flag that matches our
  ``spam_system`` function's signature.

Because modules typically create several functions, these definitions
need to be collected in an array, with a zero-filled sentinel at the end.
Add this array just below the ``spam_system`` function:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-after: /// Module method table
   :end-before: ///

As with module slots, a zero-filled sentinel marks the end of the array.

Next, we'll add the method to the module.
Add a :c:data:`Py_mod_methods` slot to your a :c:type:`PyMethodDef` array:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-after: /// Module slot table
   :end-before: ///
   :emphasize-lines: 5

Recompile your extension again, and test it.
Be sure to restart the Python interpreter, so that ``import spam`` picks

> up the new version if the module.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
up the new version of the module.
```

You should now be able to call the function:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   >>> print(spam.system)
   <built-in function system>
   >>> print(spam.system('whoami'))
   None

> Note that our ``spam.system`` does not yet run the ``whoami`` command;

Reviewer 3: The power of yet:
```suggestion
Note that our ``spam.system`` does not yet run the ``whoami`` command yet;
```

Reviewer: Did you mean to remove the first yet?

Personally I prefer the original version here.

Reviewer 3: > Personally I prefer the original version here.

How come?

Author: The original version already has a `yet` already.

it only returns ``None``.

Check that the function accepts exactly one argument, as specified by
the :c:data:`METH_O` flag:

.. code-block:: pycon

>    >>> print(spam.system('too', 'many', 'arguments'))

Reviewer 3: For completeness, it'd be nice to add an example of calling it with no arguments.

Author: I'd certainly like the reader to try this, but, I'm not striving for completeness in the text :)

   Traceback (most recent call last):
      ...
   TypeError: spam.system() takes exactly one argument (3 given)

Returning an integer
====================

Now, let's take a look at the return value.
Instead of ``None``, we'll want ``spam.system`` to return a number -- that is,
a Python :py:type:`int` object.
Eventually this will be the exit code of a system command,
but let's start with a fixed value, say, ``3``.

The Python C API provides a function to create a Python :py:type:`int` object
from a C ``int`` values: :c:func:`PyLong_FromLong`. [#why-pylongfromlong]_

To call it, replace the ``Py_RETURN_NONE`` with the following 3 lines:

> .. this could be a one-liner, but we want to show the data types here

Reviewer 3: This comment would be nice in the code rather than just the reST document.

Author: I think it'd just be a distraction.

.. code-block:: c
   :emphasize-lines: 4-6

   static PyObject *
   spam_system(PyObject *self, PyObject *arg)
   {
      int status = 3;
      PyObject *result = PyLong_FromLong(status);
      return result;
   }

Recompile, restart the Python interpreter again,
and check that the function now returns 3:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   >>> spam.system('whoami')
   3

Accepting a string
==================

Finally, let's handle the function argument.

> Our C function, :c:func:`!spam_system`, takes two arguments.

Reviewer 3: It's unclear whether we're talking about the C signature or the Python signature, because "C function" still has meaning in Python (for example, it's fine to say `os.system` is a C function in Python). I think it would be better to say something like "At the C level, `spam_system` takes two arguments".

Author: Isn't `spam_system` clear enough?

Reviewer 3: Eh, after thinking about it, I guess it is. I'm not super happy with the current wording but I guess it's not wrong.

The first one, ``PyObject *self``, will be set to the ``spam`` module
object.
This isn't useful in our case, so we'll ignore it.

The other one, ``PyObject *arg``, will be set to the object that the user

> called the Python with.

Reviewer 3: Typo? I think you wanted something like this:

```suggestion
passed from Python.
```

We expect that it should be a Python string.
In order to use the information in it, we will need

> to convert it to a C value --- in this case, a C string (``const char *``).

Reviewer 3: We've been using two dashes so far:
```suggestion
to convert it to a C value -- in this case, a C string (``const char *``).
```

The result
==========

Congratulations!
You have written a complete Python C API extension module,
and completed this tutorial!

Here is the entire source file, for your convenience:

.. _extending-spammodule-source:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-at: ///

.. _first-extension-other-tools:

Appendix: Other build tools
===========================

You should be able to follow this tutorial -- except the
*Running your build tool* section itself -- with a build tool other
than ``meson-python``.

The Python Packaging User Guide has a `list of recommended tools <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/tool-recommendations/#build-backends-for-extension-modules>`_;
be sure to choose one for the C language.

Workaround for missing PyInit function
--------------------------------------

If your build tool output complains about missing ``PyInit_spam``,
add the following function to your module for now:

.. code-block:: c

   // A workaround
   void *PyInit_spam(void) { return NULL; }

This is a shim for an old-style :ref:`initialization function <extension-export-hook>`,
which was required in extension modules for CPython 3.14 and below.

> Current CPython will not call it, but some build tools may still assume that

Reviewer 3: This is a little misleading. Current CPython will call it if defined -- it just doesn't *require* it.

.. highlight:: c

.. _extending-simpleexample:
.. _first-extension-module:

*********************************
Your first C API extension module
*********************************

This tutorial will take you through creating a simple
Python extension module written in C or C++.

We will use the low-level Python C API directly.
For easier ways to create extension modules, see
the :ref:`recommended third party tools <c-api-tools>`.

The tutorial assumes basic knowledge about Python: you should be able to
define functions in Python code before starting to write them in C.
See :ref:`tutorial-index` for an introduction to Python itself.

The tutorial should be approachable for anyone who can write a basic C library.
While we will mention several concepts that a C beginner would not be expected
to know, like ``static`` functions or linkage declarations, understanding these
is not necessary for success.

We will focus on giving you a "feel" of what Python's C API is like.
It will not teach you important concepts, like error handling

> and reference counting, which are covered in later chapters.

Reviewer 3: This isn't currently incorrect, but I feel that this reads better:
```suggestion
and reference counting, as those are covered in later chapters.
```

Reviewer: +1 for `which` (simpler, direct)

We will assume that you use a Unix-like system (including macOS and
Linux), or Windows.
On other systems, you might need to adjust some details -- for example,
a system command name.

> You need to have suitable C compiler and Python development headers installed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You need to have a suitable C compiler and Python development headers installed.
```

What we'll do
=============

Let's create an extension module called ``spam`` [#why-spam]_,
which will include a Python interface to the C
standard library function :c:func:`system`.
This function is defined in ``stdlib.h``.
It takes a C string as argument, runs the argument as a system
command, and returns a result value as an integer.
A manual page for :c:func:`system` might summarize it this way::

   #include <stdlib.h>
   int system(const char *command);

Note that like many functions in the C standard library,
this function is already exposed in Python.
In production, use :py:func:`os.system` or :py:func:`subprocess.run`
rather than the module you'll write here.

We want this function to be callable from Python as follows:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   >>> status = spam.system("whoami")
   User Name
   >>> status
   0

.. note::

   The system command ``whoami`` prints out your username.
   It's useful in tutorials like this one because it has the same name on
   both Unix and Windows.

Start with the headers
======================

Begin by creating a directory for this tutorial, and switching to it

> on command line.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
on the command line.
```
Or:
```suggestion
on your command line.
```

Reviewer: +1 for `the`

CPython itself does not come with a tool to build extension modules;
it is recommended to use a third-party project for this.
In this tutorial, we'll use `meson-python`_.
(If you want to use another one, see :ref:`first-extension-other-tools`.)

.. at the time of writing, meson-python has the least overhead for a
   simple extension using PyModExport.
   Change this if another tool makes things easier.

``meson-python`` requires defining a "project" using two extra files.

First, add ``pyproject.toml`` with these contents:

.. code-block:: toml

   [build-system]
   build-backend = 'mesonpy'
   requires = ['meson-python']

   [project]
   # Placeholder project information
   # (change this before distributing the module)
   name = 'sampleproject'
   version = '0'

Then, create ``meson.build`` containing the following:

.. code-block:: meson

   project('sampleproject', 'c')

   py = import('python').find_installation(pure: false)

   py.extension_module(
      'spam',          # name of the importable Python module
      'spammodule.c',  # the C source file
      install: true,
   )

.. note::

   See `meson-python documentation <meson-python>`_ for details on
   configuration.

> Now, build install the *project in the current directory* (``.``) via ``pip``:

Reviewer 3: Why is this italicized?

Author: To make it clearer that the (`.`) refers to the entire phrase.

.. code-block:: sh

   python -m pip install .

.. tip::

   If you don't have ``pip`` installed, run ``python -m ensurepip``,
   preferably in a :ref:`virtual environment <venv-def>`.
   (Or, if you prefer another tool that can build and install
   ``pyproject.toml``-based projects, use that.)

.. _meson-python: https://mesonbuild.com/meson-python/
.. _virtual environment: https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/installing-using-pip-and-virtual-environments/#create-and-use-virtual-environments

Note that you will need to run this command again every time you change your

> extension.
> Unlike Python, C has an explicit compilation step.

Reviewer 3: These two sentences feel very related.
```suggestion
extension, because unlike Python, C has an explicit compilation step.
```

Reviewer: Juxtaposition is a valid construct! 🙂

   :start-after: /// Export hook prototype
   :end-before: ///

.. tip::
   The prototype is not strictly necessary, but some modern compilers emit
   warnings without it.
   It's generally better to add the prototype than to disable the warning.

The :c:macro:`PyMODEXPORT_FUNC` macro declares the function's
return type, and adds any special linkage declarations needed
to make the function visible and usable when CPython loads it.

After the prototype, add the function itself.
For now, make it return ``NULL``:

.. code-block:: c

   PyMODEXPORT_FUNC
   PyModExport_spam(void)
   {
      return NULL;
   }

Compile and load the module again.
You should get a different error this time.

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   Traceback (most recent call last):
      ...
   SystemError: module export hook for module 'spam' failed without setting an exception

Simply returning ``NULL`` is *not* correct behavior for an export hook,
and CPython complains about it.
That's good -- it means that CPython found the function!
Let's now make it do something useful.

The slot table
==============

Rather than ``NULL``, the export hook should return the information needed to
create a module.

> Let's with the basics: the name and docstring.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's start with the basics: the name and docstring.
```

> The information should de defined in as ``static`` array of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The information should be defined in a ``static`` array of
```

:c:type:`PyModuleDef_Slot` entries, which are essentially key-value pairs.
Define this array just before your export hook:

.. code-block:: c

   static PyModuleDef_Slot spam_slots[] = {
      {Py_mod_name, "spam"},
      {Py_mod_doc, "A wonderful module with an example function"},
      {0, NULL}
   };

For both :c:data:`Py_mod_name` and :c:data:`Py_mod_doc`, the values are C

> strings -- that is, NUL-terminated UTF-8 encoded byte arrays.

Reviewer 3: I think we need a comma here, but I'm not completely certain:

```suggestion
strings -- that is, NUL-terminated, UTF-8 encoded byte arrays.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
strings -- that is, NUL-terminated, UTF-8-encoded byte arrays.
```

Reviewer 3: I thought about that, but we seem to use "UTF-8 encoded" everywhere else in the docs.

Note the zero-filled sentinel entry at the end.
If you forget it, you'll trigger undefined behavior.

> The array is defined as ``static`` -- not visible outside this ``.c`` file.

Reviewer 3: Small wording suggestion:
```suggestion
The array is defined as ``static`` -- that is, not visible outside this ``.c`` file.
```

This will be a common theme.
CPython only needs to access the export hook; all global variables
and all other functions should generally be ``static``, so that they don't
clash with other extensions.

Return this array from your export hook instead of ``NULL``:

.. code-block:: c
   :emphasize-lines: 4

   PyMODEXPORT_FUNC
   PyModExport_spam(void)
   {
      return spam_slots;
   }

Now, recompile and try it out:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   >>> print(spam)
   <module 'spam' from '/home/encukou/dev/cpython/spam.so'>

> You have a extension module!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You have an extension module!
```

Try ``help(spam)`` to see the docstring.

The next step will be adding a function.

.. _backtoexample:

Exposing a function
===================

To expose the :c:func:`system` C function directly to Python,
we'll need to write a layer of glue code to convert arguments from Python
objects to C values, and the C return value back to Python.

One of the simplest ways to write glue code is a ":c:data:`METH_O`" function,
which takes two Python objects and returns one.
All Python objects -- regardless of the Python type -- are represented in C

> as pointers to the ``PyObject`` structure.

Reviewer 3: It would be nice to have a link here, since this is the first time we introduce it.
```suggestion
as pointers to the :c:type:`PyObject` structure.
```

Recompile your extension to make sure you don't have syntax errors.
We haven't yet added ``spam_system`` to the module, so you might get a
warning that ``spam_system`` is unused.

.. _methodtable:

Method definitions
------------------

To expose the C function to Python, you will need to provide several pieces of
information in a structure called
:c:type:`PyMethodDef` [#why-pymethoddef]_:

* ``ml_name``: the name of the Python function;
* ``ml_doc``: a docstring;
* ``ml_meth``: the C function to be called; and
* ``ml_flags``: a set of flags describing details like how Python arguments are
  passed to the C function.
  We'll use :c:data:`METH_O` here -- the flag that matches our
  ``spam_system`` function's signature.

Because modules typically create several functions, these definitions
need to be collected in an array, with a zero-filled sentinel at the end.
Add this array just below the ``spam_system`` function:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/capi-extension/spammodule-01.c
   :start-after: /// Module method table
   :end-before: ///

As with module slots, a zero-filled sentinel marks the end of the array.

Next, we'll add the method to the module.

> Add a :c:data:`Py_mod_methods` slot to your a :c:type:`PyMethodDef` array:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Add a :c:data:`Py_mod_methods` slot to your :c:type:`PyMethodDef` array:
```

   :start-after: /// Module slot table
   :end-before: ///
   :emphasize-lines: 5

Recompile your extension again, and test it.
Be sure to restart the Python interpreter, so that ``import spam`` picks
up the new version of the module.

You should now be able to call the function:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> import spam
   >>> print(spam.system)
   <built-in function system>
   >>> print(spam.system('whoami'))
   None

Note that our ``spam.system`` does not yet run the ``whoami`` command;
it only returns ``None``.

Check that the function accepts exactly one argument, as specified by
the :c:data:`METH_O` flag:

.. code-block:: pycon

   >>> print(spam.system('too', 'many', 'arguments'))
   Traceback (most recent call last):
      ...
   TypeError: spam.system() takes exactly one argument (3 given)

Returning an integer
====================

Now, let's take a look at the return value.
Instead of ``None``, we'll want ``spam.system`` to return a number -- that is,
a Python :py:type:`int` object.
Eventually this will be the exit code of a system command,
but let's start with a fixed value, say, ``3``.

The Python C API provides a function to create a Python :py:type:`int` object

> from a C ``int`` values: :c:func:`PyLong_FromLong`. [#why-pylongfromlong]_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
from a C ``int`` value: :c:func:`PyLong_FromLong`. [#why-pylongfromlong]_
```

resulting array of bytes.
This buffer is managed by the *arg* object, which means we don't need to free
it, but we must follow some rules:

* We should only use the buffer inside the ``spam_system`` function.
  When ``spam_system`` returns, *arg* and the buffer it manages might be
  garbage-collected.
* We must not modify it. This is why we use ``const``.

If :c:func:`PyUnicode_AsUTF8` was *not* successful, it returns a ``NULL``
pointer.
When calling *any* Python C API, we always need to handle such error cases.
The way to do this in general is left for later chapters of this documentation.
For now, be assured that we are already handling errors from
:c:func:`PyLong_FromLong` correctly.

For the :c:func:`PyUnicode_AsUTF8` call, the correct way to handle errors is
returning ``NULL`` from ``spam_system``.
Add an ``if`` block for this:

.. code-block:: c
   :emphasize-lines: 5-7

   static PyObject *
   spam_system(PyObject *self, PyObject *arg)
   {
      const char *command = PyUnicode_AsUTF8(arg);
      if (command == NULL) {
         return NULL;
      }
      int status = 3;
      PyObject *result = PyLong_FromLong(status);
      return result;
   }

That's it for the setup.

> Now, all that is left is calling C library function :c:func:`system` with

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, all that is left is calling the C library function :c:func:`system` with
```

In this tutorial, we'll use `meson-python`_.
(If you want to use another one, see :ref:`first-extension-other-tools`.)

.. at the time of writing, meson-python has the least overhead for a
   simple extension using PyModExport.
   Change this if another tool makes things easier.

``meson-python`` requires defining a "project" using two extra files.

First, add ``pyproject.toml`` with these contents:

.. code-block:: toml

   [build-system]
   build-backend = 'mesonpy'
   requires = ['meson-python']

   [project]
   name = 'spammodule'
   version = '0'

Then, create ``meson.build`` containing the following:

.. code-block:: meson

   project('purelib-and-platlib', 'c')

   py = import('python').find_installation(pure: false)

   py.extension_module(
      'spam',          # name of the importable Python module
      'spammodule.c',  # the C source file
      install: true,
   )

.. note::

   See `meson-python documentation <meson-python>`_ for details on
   configuration.

Now, build install the *project in the current directory* (``.``) via ``pip``:

.. code-block:: sh

   python -m pip install .

.. tip::

   If you don't have ``pip`` installed, run ``python -m ensurepip``,

>    preferably in a :mod:`virtual environment <venv>`.

Reviewer: Do people actually need to run ensurepip if they have run `python -m venv .venv` ?

This tutorial could show the venv commands directly (and avoid ensurepip step) instead of referring to them.

Author: I added “You need to be able to install Python packages” to the intro, leaving exact steps for setting that up out of scope here.
Does that work?

Reviewer: With a link to ensurepip docs, or Python setup and usage (if that includes notes about venv/pip)?

   You can also use another tool that can build and install
   ``pyproject.toml``-based projects, like

>    `uv <https://docs.astral.sh/uv/>`_ (``uv pip install .``).

Reviewer: This note seems to contradict the intent of not providing options in a tutorial 🙂

Author: This is partly setup you're expected to have before starting, and part troubleshooting advice.

I added it to the introduction, and made this note smaller. Does that work?

Reviewer: Will check!
